# Beyond the "Fountain"

*Beyond the "Fountain"* is a digital humanities project created by Miranda Siler in the Spring of 2022 in partial fulfillment of the History of Art and Design graduate thesis requirement at Pratt Institute. [See the final map.](https://arcg.is/D8eW9)

## Background

The Society of Independent Artists, incorporated in 1916, sought to promote new United States artists, regardless of style or affiliation. The tagline for its first annual exhibition held in 1917 at the Grand Central Palace, New York City—“no jury, no prizes”—conveyed the show’s egalitarian intentions. The exhibition went so far as to arrange the pieces alphabetically by artist’s name to avoid subjective organization. Anyone was welcome to submit a piece for display. 

Most writing about the exhibition has left its equalizing goal unexamined; instead, authors favor the story of Marcel Duchamp, one of the original board members of the Society, and his renown readymade, Fountain, submitted to this 1917 exhibition under Duchamp’s pseudonym, R. Mutt. This object would eventually be seen as a watershed moment in the twentieth-century idea of Modern art. Despite the work’s dominating renown and the Society’s democratic rallying cry, the exhibition organizers rejected Duchamp’s piece and he resigned from the board in protest. In an ironic twist of fate, the story of the object that did not even appear in the exhibition is far more famous than any that did, overshadowing most of the other Society members as well as the democratic intentions of the exhibition, a historical gaffe that this project seeks to correct.

With a membership of 1,234 artists and 2,125 works shown, The Society of Independent Artists and their first show represents the largest effort prior to 1917 to showcase United States artists. Yet, the current literature pertaining to the first exhibition leaves many questions unanswered. How did artists find out about the Society? Did the Society really showcase an ensemble of work beyond a “homogeneous group of men”? Was the Society truly national in its reach? How many initial Society members would be recognized today? “Beyond the Fountain” uses a series of digital tools to examine the membership and reach of the Society of Independent Artists. The initial dataset, a list of names and addresses of Society members, comes from the back of the 1917 exhibition catalogue. By plotting these addresses and enriching them with authority files, the interactive map provides a framework for analyzing the Society’s impact that moves beyond traditional interpretations of its role within the history of art. It can also remove an initial layer of bias, in line with the group’s own exhibition practice, by presenting each artist equally, as opposed to the current tendency to only highlight a select few artists. Through the interactive map, users can more easily find both geographic clusters and geographically isolated individuals more visibly apparent than reading the catalogue’s list of addresses; this has the potential to ignite new lines of inquiry about an artist or their circle. The map can also visualize patterns of inclusion or omission from the art world. In turn, these patterns can help to answer or direct questions pertaining to the Society’s makeup and influence.

## Repository Contents

- a .txt file of back the exhibition catalogue, created using the OCR tool [Pomodoro](https://pomodoro.semlab.io/)
- a .csv file of the data, cleaned and formatted using [OpenRefine](https://openrefine.org/)
- .warc and .wacz files of the final webmap, created in [ArcGIS Online](https://www.arcgis.com/index.html) and archived using [ArchiveWeb.Page](https://webrecorder.net/tools#archivewebpage)
